# Robustly detecting actively translating ORFs from Ribo-seq data

## Installation
We highly recommend that you install RiboCop via conda
```bash
conda install -c bioconda ribocop
```

------------------

## Workflow of RiboCop

In order to run RiboCop, you need to have the following three files
prepared including:
* **genome annotation file** in GTF format, supporting both GENCODE and
Ensembl annotation
* **reference genome file** in FASTA format
* **alignment file** in BAM format

### Prepare candidate ORFs
The first step of RiboCop is to take the GTF file and the FASTA file to find all
candidate ORFs. In order to generate all candidate ORFs, please run
```bash
RiboCop prepare-orfs --gtf {GTF} --fasta {FASTA} --prefix {PREFIX}
```
The command above by default only includes ORFs with length longer than 60 nts,
and only uses 'ATG' as start codon. You can change the setting by including
options ```--min_orf_length``` and ```--start_codons```.  
Outputs:
  * _{PREFIX}\_candidate\_orfs.tsv_.

### Detecting translating ORFs
The second step of RiboCop is to take the index file generated by ```prepare-orfs```
and the BAM file to detect the actively translating ORFs by assessing the periodicity
of all candidate ORFs:
```bash
RiboCop detect-orfs --bam {BAM} --ribocop_index {PREFIX}_candidate_ORFs.tsv --prefix {PREFIX}
```
The ORF detection step consists of several small steps including:
1. Infer the experimental protocol (strandedness of the reads)  
You can directly assign the strandedness by using option ```--stranded```, it can be 'yes',
'no', or 'reverse'. If this option is not provided, RiboCop will automatically infer the
experimental protocol by comparing the strand of reads to the reference.   
Outputs:
    * _{PREFIX}\_protocol.txt_
2. Split the bam file by strand and read length  
In this step, all mapped reads will be filtered to include only uniquely mapped reads. Reads
will be split by strand and read length with respect to the strandedness provided or inferred
from the last step. If you only want to include certain read lengths, they can be assigned with
option ```--read_lengths```.
Outputs:
    * _{PREFIX}\_bam\_summary.txt_ 
3. Plot read length distribution  
In this step, read length distribution will be plotted and serves as quality control  
Outputs:
    * _{PREFIX}\_reads\_plot.pdf_
4. Calculate metagene profiles  
In this step, the metagene profile of all CDS transcripts for each read length is
calculated by aligning with start codon or stop codon.  
Outputs:
    * _{PREFIX}\_metagene\_profiles.tsv_
5. Plot metagene profiles  
In this step, metagene plots will be made to serve as quality control.  
Outputs:
    * _{PREFIX}\_metagene\_plot.pdf_
6. Align metagene profiles
7. Export wig file
8. Export actively translating ORFs  
Outputs:
    * _{PREFIX}\_translating\_ORFs.tsv_
    

------------------

## LICENSE
RiboCop for detecting actively translating ORFs from Ribo-seq data
Copyright (C) 2018 Andrew D Smith, Wenzheng Li, Saket Choudhary and
the University of Southern California

This program is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or (at
your option) any later version.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
GNU General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
along with this program.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
